>> Evgenii Ray: Let's discuss how we
built the UI state in our applications.
So the data that we store on
the UI has two properties.
It actually has two things,
the data class,
so the type of data that we store,
and the data properties.
The data type, the data classes
can be the app configuration,
like user theme, locale, font size,
or accessibility settings.
It can also be the UI elements state,
for instance, in Google Docs,
you can select some special formatting and
your element will keep the state.
Or it can be the server data that
we store from the server and
use to render a new elements in the UI.
Then we have the data properties.
Each data class can have different
data properties, for instance,
the access level, should the data be
global or local, read and write frequency.
So if we expect that
the data is read often, so
there is a high frequency write or read,
then we can't us synchronous storages
because we'll block the UI thread.
So we need to make sure that this data
either in the synchronous storage or
in our runtime memory.
So it's also the size,
the larger the data,
there is a high chance that
we'll block our UI thread
because we'll need to utilize
a lot of CPU to process such data.
If you're trying to parse 500 megabytes
file, then it will take a lot of
time to actually read this data and
also process this data into the object.
And there are some general principles
that we can apply when we design
the application state.
The first one, the more generic one,
we need to make sure that the access
cost to this data is minimal.
So our data should be accessible
at least in the constant time.
Once we optimize that, we can think
about the search optimization.
We need to make sure that the search
operation in our app is fast.
And the last part, we need to
somehow optimize the memory usage.
The more things we store in
the application, the more likely we're
going to utilize too many objects,
and we can easily bloat our RAM.
So let's get the practical
kind of example.
So we have the Messenger app where
we render the contact list, and each
contact has a conversation where we can
have thousands of messages potentially.
>> Evgenii Ray: And
how would you optimize that?
So the most obvious approach will be just
to put everything into the context state
and the global state.
But there is a problem with that.
So if you want to access
a contact with id Jane Smith, and
we want to find any message with id 5,
then we're going to do two hoops.
First, we're gonna
filter out the contacts,
then we're going to
filter out the messages.
This is although acceptable,
it's still not the best way
because if we have potentially
thousands of messages,
then we need to traverse the whole
array just to access single element.
This is not the way we
want to design our app.
So the first technique that
we can use to optimize
our data is to change how we store it.
And there is a concept
called data normalization.
So the data normalization has been around
for, I think, 20 or 30 years already.
So it's a concept used and
the database is heavily.
The goals of data normalization is to
provide optimized access performance and
also provide the optimized structure,
how we store the data.
And if we have a unified structure,
how we store things in a state,
it increases the readability of
our code and for maintenance.
And data normalization operates
with the normal forms,
they're in total seven normal forms.
And the farther you go,
the more you normalized.
In the UI apps we usually utilize
only two or three normal forms,
and let's go through the process
of data normalization.
So if we take the first example where
we have a simple object with the id and
name and then it has the job and location.
So right now it's a non-normalized object.
So we can optimize this by applying
the first normal form, and what the first
normal form does is tells us that every
field on your object should be atomic.
So we need to reduce any
nesting in our objects.
So we just flatten
the nested objects here.
>> Evgenii Ray: The job object
becomes the job_id and job_title, and
the location becomes country_code and
the country_name.
Also the first normal form tells us that
there should be the primary key, and
we know that we already have the primary
key, which is the id that we can utilize.
So next, we can convert our first
normal form to the second normal form.
And what the second normal form does,
it tells us that all our fields now
ideally should depend on the entity.
So if we look at the following fields,
the job_id and
job_title, the job_title
actually depends on the job_id,
although it also depends
on our user object.
So the data summarization tells us that we
need to decouple this into the separate
table in the database concept, but in our
case, it will be the separate object.
So we move our job to the jobs table.
Now we have the key,
which is UIE as a job id, and
now we have the information
relevant to this job.
And we also normalized the user jobs, so
we can access what type of job
the user has by providing the id.
So now all our entities
depend on the primary key.
There is a third normal form.
>> Evgenii Ray: Actually, yeah, also we
move the countries to separate table.
There is a third normal form that tells us
the main difference from the second one.
We say that non-primary keys should
depend on the entity primary key.
But the third normal form enforces this
rule, saying that it should depend only on
the primary key, and
the difference is very subtle.
So if we look at the UIE job,
it has a title and department.
So department really might not be directly
related to the UI or to the title.
So we want to decouple that to say, okay,
the department should directly
depend on the UIE id.
So we move the department
to additional table and
now we can access the department
type by providing the job id.
The third normal form
sometimes is excessive.
Usually on the UI,
we use the second normal form.
So it's up to your case if
you want to apply an app.
So if we go back to our Messenger example,
let's try to convert our
non-normalized data,
the state of the Messenger,
to second normal form.
So first we want to reduce the nesting.
So we want to remove the conversation and
the messages.
So once we remove the conversation and
the messages objects from from a table.
Now we apply the Atomic Fields rules.
Now we store the conversation_
id instead of the object, and
on the message we also
store the conversation_id.
And we also create a new type called
conversation, which has the id and
the title, and we also remove
the messages from the conversation.
>> Evgenii Ray: Now we
identify the primary keys.
So for the contact,
it will be id, for the message,
it's a message_id, for
the conversation, it's also id.
And then we store these
fields on the global state.
So now to access the message with
a certain id, we just provide an id.
And it will return us the message,
the same for
conversation and for the contact.
So although, you still may notice that
to find specific message in the array,
we still need to traverse
all the messages.
How can we optimize even that?
So let's move on to the second principle,
minimize the search cost.
>> Evgenii Ray: So
we could potentially build an index table,
which we'll call inverted index table.
It's called inverted because
the content of the entity
becomes the key in this sense.
So what we're gonna do,
we're gonna extract all the words
from the message content.
And then we're gonna build
the index table where the key
is the word from the content
of the message, and
we're gonna store the id of the message
where this content appears.
And a timestamp that
will help us to sort out
search results in the timestamp order.
So later, we can utilize some asynchronous
job to build this inverted index table.
This can be a web worker,
that will access the IndexedDB and
store it in the storage, or
you can use the idle cycle of your
event loop to build this index
table in your application.
But you may notice that, okay,
I can search by the word.
But what if I want to
search by the prefix?
Can we improve it even further?
And apparently we can,
we can use the composite key for
the invertening of this table.
So now we're gonna store all
personal prefixes of the word and
keep the message id and the timestamp.
So if we type in the search bar,
for instance,
ja, this will give us
all the messages where
we saw the ja in the conversation thread.
So we can store in
JavaScript the string as
array because the key
should be always a string.
That's where the storage comes in.
So before we discuss the storage,
let's understand how we're
gonna manage the memory.
So, yep?
>> Speaker 2: So in this example, there's
just two messages, but in theory, if you
had multiple messages that started with
hey, those would all end up under that
single either [CROSSTALK] composite key-
>> Evgenii Ray: Yeah, so
you will have multiple tuples here.
>> Speaker 2: Okay.
>> Evgenii Ray: So
the inverted index table may become large.
So for instance, we may have already
a 1,000 of messages in each conversation
thread, so we don't want to
blow the memory of the device.
So how can we optimize that?
Right now,
we have the conversation with John, but
we know that there are two more
conversation that are not active.
So we can just select them from the state,
since we know the conversation ID,
and we can filter out the entries.
Now what we can do, we can outsource
that to the separate storage.
So we move this element to
the separate storage, and
we basically sharded our data.
So it's basically,
the database concept in the browser where,
in the database, you don't have
the single large DB instance.
So you have a shard and you store your
data partially in multiple shards.
And when you do the query, you're actually
querying from the different shards.
The same way happens here, but
we are limited to two shards.
One is our global state,
which is runtime memory.
And the second one is our hard drive.
So when we move elements
to the hard drive,
we let the JavaScript engine to utilize
all the objects from the memory and
let the garbage collector
free up the space.
And for instance,
if we selected the new conversation and
we want to load the data
back to the store,
we can utilize the storage to just
populate this back to our runtime memory.
And we basically are going to
swap back and forth the data.
And now the question is,
what type of storage should I
use to achieve such behavior?
And let's do the quick overview.
So the storage API provides
three types of storages for us.
It's the Indexed DB, local storage,
and the session storage.
So the session storage is good for
storing some small non-persistent data,
so it stores things only for
one single session.
When the user closes the website,
the session is destroyed and
the data is wiped.
The local storage on
the other hand is good for
storing small things,
it can be user preferences,
you can also store non-persistent data and
discard it if you want.
But the local storage
provides persistence.
But the problem with the local storage and
the session storage,
they only support the string type and
they are asynchronous.
So if you have a data that you expect
to read a lot and write, then you
will block the UI thread, and it will
impact your application responsiveness.
So what do we need to do to re-implement
the behavior we discussed previously on
the slides?
So the IndexedDB, on the other hand,
has the almost unlimited storage capacity,
on average 3 gigabytes, and
it also supports indexing.
So we can create a composite
index we discussed and
store the key as a set of prefixes.
And we can actually enable this
search using the IndexedDB, so
we can utilize this index.
And also the IndexedDB supports
multiple type of data,
which is very useful when
we store complex objects.
And it's also non-blocking.
So it's a synchronous, it means that we
will not block the UI thread in this case.
>> Evgenii Ray: So the summary for
application state design is first,
you need to know your scale.
Always start with the way how
you structure your data, and
use normal forms to provide
optimized access cost.
And use indexes if you're planning to
do the search operations in your app.
If you think that you will need
to store a good amount of data
in your state,
then offload the data to a hard drive.
For us as developers, it's basically,
the free space that we can use.
It will improve your
responsiveness of the app.
And also you need to be mindful
about the type of storage you use.
Utilize the data properties,
if you expect it to read the data a lot,
use the asynchronous storage.
For small things, utilize the local
storage or the session storage.
And that's it for
the application state design.